📖 doc: add release cycle doc (#7391)
kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api: docs/developer/release-cycle.md

# Release Cycle

The release cycle is the time between when we start working on a release on the `main` branch until the `.0` release (e.g. `v1.3.0`) is released.

**Note**: For the `v1.3` and `v1.4` releases we assume each release cycle will last approximately 4 months (~ 17 weeks).
The release cycle duration will be revisited after the `v1.4.0` release.

A release cycle can be split up into the following phases:

* Week 1-12: Active development

>     * Alpha releases will be released based on the main branch only if necessary (to be determined by the release lead)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * All the changes impacting providers' adoption should be implemented and merged in this period; exceptions require special approval as described in the section below. 
    * Alpha releases will be released based on the main branch only if necessary (to be determined by the release lead)
```

Author: Done!

    * Please note that we also publish daily releases based on the main branch.
* Week 13-14: Beta
    * Weekly beta releases will be released based on the main branch
        * The beta releases are meant as a preview of the upcoming release
        * Providers can start adopting the new release based on the beta releases

>     * All changes that impact providers' adoption of the new release should be announced in the provider updates section

Author: I think it's fine:

> Provider updates
> Use this section to share the great work happening in providers and **for topics that can be of interest to all provider implementers** e.g. how to ensure that all the providers are consistent from the user PoV, how to improve the CAPI contract etc. . You can add updates even if you can’t join the meeting.
[Provider name] [your name]: <updates>

      of the office hours meeting notes and approved in the PR or issue by both approvers and key affected providers.
* Week 15-16: RC
    * The release branch is created
    * Weekly RC releases will be released based on the release branch
        * RC releases are as close as possible to the final release but they are still undergoing further testing
    * Development of the next release can technically start on the main branch, but some changes might be delayed
      to ensure easier cherry-picking of other changes to the release branch.
    * There is a feature freeze on the release branch
        * Only cherry-picks for documentation, bug fixes, test fixes and test additions are allowed
* Week 17: GA

>     * `.0` GA release is created based on the release branch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * `x.y.0` GA release is created based on the release branch
```

To make it less ambiguous.

* After that:
    * **Note** The following is the responsibility of the release team of the following release cycle.

>     * `.1+`: Monthly patch releases will be released based on the release branch

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * `x.y.1+`: Monthly patch releases will be released based on the release branch
```
To make it less ambiguous.

>     * Cherry-picks to the release branch are allowed according to the backport policy

Reviewer 2: How about linking the back port policy here?
```suggestion
    * Cherry-picks to the release branch are allowed according to the [backport policy](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cluster-api/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md#backporting-a-patch)
```

Author: Good idea. Thx!

# Release Cycle

> The release cycle is the time between when we start working on a release on the `main` branch until the `.0` release (e.g. `v1.3.0`).

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
The release cycle is the time between when we start working on a release on the `main` branch until the `.0` release (e.g. `v1.3.0`) is generated.
```

Author: I'll use "is released". I think generated is not the right word

> **Note**: For the `v1.3` and `v1.4` release cycles we assume a ~ 4 months (~ 17 weeks) release cycle. This should be revisited after the `v1.4.0` release.
> 
> The release cycle can be split up into the following phases:

Reviewer: what about:

```suggestion
For the `v1.3` and `v1.4` releases we assume each release cycle will last ~ 4 months (~ 17 weeks); the release cycle duration will be revisited after the `v1.4.0` release.

Each release cycle can be split up into the following phases:
```

Author: ~ changed to this

* Week 1-12: Active development

>     * Alpha releases based on the main branch can be released when necessary

Reviewer 3: should we also mention monthly patch releases for the previous release?

Author: I have it in "After that"

I'm not sure if we should try to integrate montly patch releases of previous release cycles into the timline of the current release cycle. It's definitely something that should be mentioned in the tasks for the release team of the current release cycle though (but that's another doc/PR)

It's definitely something that has to be done. Currently it's just outside of the definition of a release cycle ("release cycle is the time between when we start working on a release on the `main` branch until the `.0` release (e.g. `v1.3.0`)")

Reviewer 3: Got it, I guess k8s doesn't include those in release timeline either

Author: Exactly

Author: I'll keep it here in this description only under "After that" to just have a description of one individual release cycle.

I'll try to do something with the timeline

>     * Alpha releases based on the main branch can be released when necessary

Reviewer 4: >can be released when necessary

can we define/specify "necessary"?

Author: Good question. 

My current point of view is if someone comes up with a reason why they need an alpha release (e.g. it's easier to start testing against a first alpha release of Cluster API) / if someone asks for it.

We could instead also considering implementing nightly releases for release branches. It shouldn't be a lot of effort as we already have them for the main branch.

Those are not full releases but we publish images and manifests and they can be consumed relatively easily (we would have to document them better then we document our nightly releases today though)

Reviewer 5: +1 for nightly releases

Reviewer: I will keep alpha in the radar, and we can define if necessary as determined by the release lead.

WRT to nightly let's open an issue and make an assessment if they are really required first (recently generation of nightly release was broken for a couple of weeks and no one complained about it)

Author: > recently generation of nightly release was broken for a couple of weeks and no one complained about it

+1. Although I would argue that nightly releases on release branches are more useful. They can be used to verify/use fixes recently merged to release branches of which were using the corresponding releases. I guess nobody is using main and thus nightly release for main are not that useful.

Reviewer 3: > We could instead also considering implementing nightly releases for release branches. It shouldn't be a lot of effort as we already have them for the main branch.

We can't do that until the release branch actually exists which brings us into the RC timeframe... alpha and beta releases would be cut directly from the main branch

Author: Good point, thx! I mixed up some things.

But given we already have nightly releases for main, we already have nightly releases which can be used. We should definitely document better how to use them 

They should definitely make alpha releases less necessary :)

That being said, I would keep the current language that the release lead can decide to cut one. Might be useful even if it's just to the new release tooling. We can change it later if it becomes a problem

Author: Added a comment to emphasize that for week 1-12 we already have nightly releases.

I'll open a separate issue later to discuss if we want nightly releases for release branches (but they don't matter for the discussion about alpha releases)

>     * Alpha releases based on the main branch can be released when necessary

Reviewer: what about
```suggestion
    * Alpha releases will be generated based on the main branch only if necessary
    * All the changes impacting providers' adoption should be implemented and merged in this period; exceptions require special approval as described in the section below. 
```

* Week 13-14:
    * Beta releases based on the main branch
    * The beta releases are meant as a preview what the upcoming release will look like

>     * Provider can start adopting the new release based on the beta releases

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    * Providers can start adopting the new release based on the beta releases
```

>     * Provider can start adopting the new release based on the beta releases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Weekly Beta releases will be generated based on the main branch
           * The beta releases are meant as a preview of what the upcoming release will look like
           * Providers can start adopting the new release based on the beta releases

>     * Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed and approved in the office hours

Author: Very good point, thank you!

What would be the right process we want to follow?

A first suggestion:
* Create/have an issue describing the change
* Issue has to be surfaced in the office hours
  * So folks in the office hours that are not necessarily following all our issues have a chance to chime in
  * Important to note: Surfacing the issue in office hours does not have to be done by the issue author in person (time zones, ...). The can also just add it to the agenda and then one of the maintainers can bring it up.
* Issue has to be approved via +1 on the issue

Not sure what the threshold for approval should be given we are talking about breaking changes for providers and it's hard to define what approval "by providers" means (i.e. which provider are we asking, ...). Maybe to keep it simple >= 2 +1s from core CAPI maintainers + no veto from other maintainers?

Open to all suggestions, especially for simpler processes ;)

>     * Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed and approved in the office hours

Reviewer 4: The above makes sense to me, maybe if we want to keep it simple for starters we can say something like `Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed in the office hours and in the absence of clear immediate consensus they'd need to follow an async approval process via issue discussion.`

>     * Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed and approved in the office hours

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * All the changes impacting providers' adoption have to be discussed and approved during the office hours
    * During this period PRs should focus on the stabilization of the release
```

>     * Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed and approved in the office hours

Reviewer: +1 to keep it simple

>     * Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed and approved in the office hours

Reviewer 3: > don't think is the appropriate venue though for making decisions as approve/reject something which I think it should follow an async procedure most of the time

great point, thanks for bringing that up @enxebre 

IMO we should not ever make any consensus during office hours because it's a non-inclusive format. We can discuss in office hours to bring clarity and offer an opportunity for people to ask questions, but consensus should be reached asynchronously. Especially in this case since it touches providers and we don't want a breaking change that affects a provider to be made because there was "clear immediate consensus" in office hours even though the affected provider(s) weren't represented. 

I propose we amend to:

```
Breaking changes to providers should be announced in the provider updates section of the office hours meeting notes and approved in the PR or issue by both approvers and key affected providers.
```

>     * Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed and approved in the office hours

Author: I merged this suggestion with Fabrizio's 
WDYT?

>     * All changes that impact providers' adoption of the new release should be announced in the provider updates section 
      of the office hours meeting notes and approved in the PR or issue by both approvers and key affected providers.

>     * Breaking changes to providers have to be discussed and approved in the office hours

Reviewer 3: LGTM

> * Week 15-16:
>     * The release branch is created
>     * RC releases based on the release branch
>     * There is a feature freeze on the release branch
>     * Only bug fixes / documentation / tests fixes and additions are allowed

Reviewer: What about 
```suggestion
* Week 15-16:
    * The release branch is created
    * Weekly RC releases will be generated based on the release branch
       * RC releases are as much as possible near the final release but are still being tested
       * Providers can start adopting the new release
    * The Main branch is technically open for the next release, but some changes might be delayed to ensure easier cherry-picking on the release branch
    * There is a feature freeze on the release branch
       * Only cherry-picks for bug fixes/documentation/tests fixes and additions are allowed
```

* Week 17:
    * `.0` GA release is created based on the release branch

> * After that:
>     * `.1+`: Monthly patch releases based on the release branch
>     * Provider releases corresponding to the CAPI minor release when they are ready

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* After that:
    * `.1+`: Monthly patch releases will be generated based on the release branch
    * Main branch is officially open for the next release
    * Cherry picks to the release branch are allowed according to to backport policies
    * Providers create a release using the CAPI minor release when they are ready
```

Some additional notes:

> * Support for new Kubernetes releases is first implemented on the main branch, then cherry-picked into

Author: No it's specifically about Kubernetes minor releases. Our CI always tests against the latest patch version of all minor releases that we currently support. So "bumping to support new Kubernetes patch releases" is implicitly done by keeping CI stable. Although I can't remember a case where we had to fix something in CAPI for a new Kubernetes patch release.

But there's a nuance there that I should clarify (also in the doc).

There's a difference between supporting:
1. a new Kubernetes minor version for mgmt and workload clusters
2. using Kubernetes and Controller-Runtime go dependencies in our code

For example, we don't have to use Kubernetes 1.26 go libraries to be able to run on Kubernetes 1.26 mgmt clusters and create Kubernetes 1.26 workload clusters.

> * Support for new Kubernetes releases is first implemented on the main branch, then cherry-picked into

Author: Rephrased

  supported release branches when feasible and eventually released in the next monthly patch release(s).
* New Kubernetes and Controller-Runtime (CR) minor releases are only picked up on the main branch.

The following diagram visualizes the release cycles with the v1.2, v1.3 and v1.4 releases:

<!-- The release cycle png can be opened and edited in draw.io -->
![Release Cycle Overview](release-cycle-overview.png)

> # v1.3 Release Cycle timeline

Reviewer: Should we add a note that this release will be used to set up the work for the release team that will be effective from the following cycle?

Similarly, down I will add a note about the fact that 1.4 will be the first release cycle with a release team and also add a section with the release team Roles/Names (TBD)

Author: Mostly done.

I think it makes sense to have a table with Role => Names (including shadows) mapping. 
But I wouldn't block this PR until the release team is 100% finalized.

Reviewer: sure, it should be a placeholder with TBD

Author: Will do on the next update

The following table shows the preliminary dates for the `v1.3` release cycle.

> | **What**                                       | **Who** | **When**                   | **Week** |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **What**                                       | **When**                   | **Week** |
```

|------------------------------------------------|---------|----------------------------|----------|
| Start of Release Cycle                         | Lead    | Monday 18th July 2022      | week 1   |
| 1.3.0-beta.0 released                          | Lead    | Tuesday 1st November 2022  | week 13  |
| 1.3.0-beta.1 released                          | Lead    | Tuesday 8th November 2022  | week 14  |
| release-1.3 branch created (**[Code Freeze]**) | Lead    | Tuesday 15th November 2022 | week 15  |

> | release-1.3 jobs created                       | Lead    | Tuesday 15th November 2022 | week 15  |

Reviewer 3: for who is "Lead" release lead? for creating CI jobs shouldn't that be the CI manager?

| 1.3.0-rc.0 released                            | Lead    | Tuesday 15th November 2022 | week 15  |
| 1.3.0-rc.1 released                            | Lead    | Tuesday 22th November 2022 | week 16  |
| **1.3.0 released**                             | Lead    | Tuesday 29th November 2022 | week 17  |

# v1.4 Release Cycle timeline

The following table shows the preliminary dates for the `v1.4` release cycle.

| **What**                                             | **Who** | **When**                   | **Week** |
|------------------------------------------------------|---------|----------------------------|----------|

> | Start of Release Cycle                               | Lead    | Monday 5th December 2022   | week 1   |

Reviewer 3: should this table also have patch release dates?

Reviewer 3: I'm just worried that it looks like the release team has nothing to do between week 1 and week 14 which is not true since patch releases are a lot of work too

Author: Ah yup, that makes sense. I'll see if there's a good way to integrate it

Author: It was definitely a good idea to add the dates to the table as it allows aligning patch releases with beta/GA releases of the current cycle

* Week 13-14: Beta
    * Weekly beta releases will be released based on the main branch
        * The beta releases are meant as a preview of the upcoming release
        * Providers can start adopting the new release based on the beta releases
    * All changes that impact providers' adoption of the new release should be announced in the provider updates section 
      of the office hours meeting notes and approved in the PR or issue by both approvers and key affected providers.
* Week 15-16: RC
    * The release branch is created
    * Weekly RC releases will be released based on the release branch
        * RC releases are as close as possible to the final release but they are still undergoing further testing
    * Development of the next release can technically start on the main branch, but some changes might be delayed
      to ensure easier cherry-picking of other changes to the release branch.
    * There is a feature freeze on the release branch
        * Only cherry-picks for documentation, bug fixes, test fixes and test additions are allowed
* Week 17: GA
    * `.0` GA release is created based on the release branch
* After that:

>     * `.1+`: Monthly patch releases will be released based on the release branch

Reviewer 3: should we make it clear that this is the responsibility of the next release team?

Author: Yes

      as bumping dependencies to a new minor version is a breaking change.
* New Kubernetes and Controller-Runtime (CR) minor releases are only picked up on the main branch.

The following diagram visualizes the release cycles with the v1.2, v1.3 and v1.4 releases:

<!-- The release cycle png can be opened and edited in draw.io -->
![Release Cycle Overview](release-cycle-overview.png)

# v1.3 Release Cycle timeline

**Note**: This release will be used to set up documentation, automation, etc. for the first release team which will start with
the `v1.4` release cycle.

The following table shows the preliminary dates for the `v1.3` release cycle.

| **What**                                       | **When**                   | **Week** |
|------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------|
| Start of Release Cycle                         | Monday 18th July 2022      | week 1   |
| 1.3.0-beta.0 released                          | Tuesday 1st November 2022  | week 13  |
| 1.3.0-beta.1 released                          | Tuesday 8th November 2022  | week 14  |

> | release-1.3 branch created (**[Code Freeze]**) | Tuesday 15th November 2022 | week 15  |

Reviewer 6: nit, to make it consistent with the other table: 
```suggestion
| release-1.3 branch created (**Begin [Code Freeze]**) | Tuesday 15th November 2022 | week 15  |
```

Author: Thx!

| release-1.3 jobs created                       | Tuesday 15th November 2022 | week 15  |
| 1.3.0-rc.0 released                            | Tuesday 15th November 2022 | week 15  |
| 1.3.0-rc.1 released                            | Tuesday 22th November 2022 | week 16  |

> | **1.3.0 released**                             | Tuesday 29th November 2022 | week 17  |

Reviewer 3: note: this is right after US thanksgiving

Author: Good point. I could move it a bit if we want. Maybe just to Thursday?

@ykakarap WDYT?

I'm on PTO starting on 3rd December (for 2 weeks) but that doesn't have to be a problem

Author: Moved it to 31st Thursday for now.

Reviewer 2: Thursday should be fine.

> After the `.0` release monthly patch release wil be created.

Reviewer 6: nit:
```suggestion
After the `.0` release monthly patch release will be created.
```

Author: Thx!
